hi everybody today I'm going to talk
about hybrid stars and in particular a
type of object called a thorn zit Cal
object a TZ this is where a red giant
star hosts in its core a neutron
star uh these are probably pretty rare
but they may be between 20 and 200 such
objects in our Milky Way um and uh out
of the 40 billion or so stars that makes
them pretty rare so where could they
come from well perhaps uh wandering
neutron star might happen upon a red
giant and they might collide with each
other that's going to be quite rare
unless we're in a very crowded area such
as a globular cluster shown on the top
right there or
perhaps a uh center of the galaxy
somewhere where the stars are very much
more packed together than they are out
where we are with the sun it could form
from binary Stars where the pair of
stars evolve through their life and uh
one of them detonates as a
supernova and then that leaves behind a
neutron star and as a result of the
Supernova it disrupts the orbit of the
pair such that the neutron star spirals
into close and collides with the outer
atmosphere of its red giant companion um
and the drag from hitting that
atmosphere would very rapidly cause its
orbit to Decay and it would spiral in
through the core of the Star right into
the center um and uh so that's another
possibility but they would soon merge in
both cases down to this hybrid star with
the neutron star in the core and the
overlying regions of the star looking to
all intense purposes like a red
giant now as I said these were predicted
by two astronomers Kip Thorne very
famous Nobel Prize winner for physics
does a lot of work on black holes and
Anna zika I've met Anna she's based in
Cambridge here in the UK and still
active doing a lot of research but back
in
1977 they published this prediction that
these strange hybrid objects might exist
um and it was a long time before we were
really able to find out whether this was
right or not
and we're still not entirely
sure so it might be quite surprising
that a star containing a neutron star in
the center would be stable at all you
would imagine that the neutron star
would have material falling onto it and
that it would be uh crushing down to the
enormous pressures um inside the neutron
star and converting it into more neutron
star quite rapidly um now this is true
but actually the the radiation from a
lot of the surface of the neutron star
as material falls in gets very hot um
very high pressure and it kicks off a
lot of unusual nuclear fusion reactions
that can't normally occur until you get
to temperatures of a billion degrees or
so um and then the radiation released
carrying that energy pushes outwards and
tends to push material away throttling
back and limiting the rate at which
material can accrete onto the neutron
star so they're stable for longer
perhaps in theory than you might
think but the vast amount of energy
being released as a result of that um
strange nuclear fusion reactions
triggered by the spark plug the the uh
neutron star right in the center there
changes the characteristics and the
energy balance of the star it's
producing a lot more energy from the
material that's falling into the center
there than you would just get under
ordinary circumstances so this might
give us something of a clue that uh an
outwardly ordinary Red Giant star might
in fact host one of these strange
neutron stars in the
center one of the things that's a real
clue is the production by those peculiar
nuclear processes of unusual rarer
elements
elements that are not made under normal
circumstances during the life cycle of
an ordinary star Stars carry out the
nuclear fusion process building up
elements from hydrogen to helium carbon
oxygen all the way up to iron shown on
the diagram at the bottom right there
Stellar Fusion the little red arrow at
the bottom part of the diagram but
they're only able to go up to this
position of um iron and nickel in the uh
periodic table there the first um 26 or
elements after that all of the rest of
the elements have to be produced by
rather more exotic and much more
energetic processes such as the
Collision of neutron stars or the
explosion of supern noi as the core
collapses down uh these generally
release a blizzard of neutrons and you
get the neutrons B bombarding the
existing nuclei and they Rush up that
rather colorful diagram all the way up
to the heavier elements up with things
like lead and uranium and so forth
produced in these uh uh Pro violent
processes but what you tend to not get
is some of the elements like rubidium
meibum rum and zirconium those odd ball
elements are fairly rare but the theory
is that because of the violent
conditions inside a tzo object you would
get quite a lot of these medium weight
proton Rich nuclei made in the so-called
rapid proton capture process the RP
process that's marked on the diagram
there caused by the the 1 billion degree
temperatures at the surface of the
neutron star boundary it also is likely
to produce a lot of lithium 7 and again
the high amount of radiation coming off
this energetic boundary
layer can cause the outer layers of the
star to fully conve so that the material
made in the boundary layer these strange
Fusion products get brought up dredged
up to the surface and revealed in the
spectrum of the light that we can see
and so this is a clue we should look at
the Spectrum of these uh uh stars to see
if this rapid proton capture process
whereby protons smash into uh nuclei and
push them rapidly to higher and higher
atomic number so we've got a little
extract of it here um uh where we've got
arsenic turning into selenium um and
decaying and then being promoted to
bromine and all the way up to Krypton
but it produces a whole range of
different elements going one at a time
up through the uh periodic table and
that's unusual in some ways because we
normally go when we're doing ordinary
Fusion we're adding a helium nucleus
usually and we go two steps at a time
you get a lot of the even numbered
Isotopes but this process produces a
complete range um and that's where it's
unusual
now these objects of course they don't
live forever either this is another
reason why they might be rare that
material is falling in onto the neutron
star inside this uh outer envelope of
the red giant but gradually uh one of a
number of things can
happen firstly
the shell of the red giant material can
gradually be depleted and collapse down
forming a disc and uh a bright and
massive accretion disc around the
outside of the uh neutron star exposing
the neutron star from the top and bottom
you might get jets forming from the
magnetic poles of the neutron star um
but with a very powerful emission of hot
X-rays and uh so forth from the ins
spiraling material in the accretion disc
um and it's also possible there might be
enough material in that disc for that to
re accrete in the dis itself and form
itself back into a companion orbiting
star so you'd have a neutron star with a
very young star orbiting around it and
that would be interesting if we ever saw
that because a neutron star is the end
stage of a very old system and uh to
have a brand new Young Star orbiting
around it it must have got there somehow
and that might be a clue that the system
had been a tzo at one stage um this is
very similar in some ways to the Moon
forming around the earth out of a
probable disc that the Earth might have
had after the big Splat Collision um
with the hypothetical Planet Thea that
formed the moon but that's another
story the other possibility is that
enough Mass manages to fall onto the
neutron star and it grows in mass and
goes beyond 2.2 solar masses of neutron
star the so-called Tolman Oppenheimer
vov limit um at which the strength of
Neutron matter that's holding it up
against the crushing force of gravity is
no longer sufficient and the whole thing
would collapse down to form a black hole
and at that stage again we might have a
black hole with an accretion disc or
even a black hole with a young star
orbiting around it and so there are a
lot of things a lot of things we can go
and look for in our Galactic surveys to
try and find these but I think the most
promising is definitely to look at the
Spectrum to look for the uh
unusual chemical elements in that
Spectrum we could also detect it from
gravitational waves coming from the Star
the effect of the neutron star in the
center there perhaps if it's still
spiraling inwards would be gravitational
radiation and it's also the case that
actually the star will be too bright for
its mass so if we are able to measure
its mass somehow perhaps there's a third
original member of the group that hasn't
become absorbed and is still orbiting
ground and we can see that the tzo
candidate is in our binary system with
another object we might be able to use
uh Kepler's laws of planetary motion and
our understanding of gravity to work out
the mass of the tzo and if we can also
measure the distance and find the true
power output long chain of reasoning we
can get to uh a measure of the power
output per unit mass of the star and if
that's too great then perhaps we found
ourselves a tzo with a neutron star
lurking at the
center so what have we found well there
was a candidate for this HV
2112 this is a cool red star observed in
the large melenic Cloud the dwarf Galaxy
seen from the southern hemisphere that
are orbits around Theon Milky Way and it
was first spotted in survey of variable
stars um by Henrietta Lev swan in 1908
when she was studying these variable
stars in the large and small melenic
Cloud she used those because the stars
were all at the same distance and being
at the same distance part of this Cloud
about 200,000 light years away uh we
could compare the brightness of them
against each other and know that they
were all the same distance from us and
that led to the discovery that you could
use a class of stars called seid
variables as standard candles a
technique that's used today and henria L
Swan developed that well she found this
star and noted that it was a variable
but it wasn't a sepid and it wasn't one
of the types she was looking
for so we then scroll forward all the
way to
2014 when Lis argued
that actually this particular star
having been cataloged they noted that at
that distance it was too bright for um
it to be an ordinary star it's producing
over 100,000 times the Luminosity of our
sun so a very very much a Powerhouse um
and she also spotted that it contained
excesses of the elements lithium malum
and rubinum ruidum that we've talked
about before the these are unusual
they're not very common in ordinary
stars and uh that goes back to the 1977
prediction by the likes of uh Thorne and
zit
cow of these uh types of objects now
we're not sure it's been disputed 2017
bezer Davis at Al published a paper the
reference is on the screen there if
you're interested and they think this
might be an ordinary advant asymptotic
giant branch star at an advanced stage
of being a red giant where nuclear
fusion of higher elements Beyond helium
and carbon is going on in the center of
the star um perhaps accounting for some
of the strange spectral lines that we
see um and there have been arguments
about the distance and a number of other
factors calling into question the result
so is this a
tzo maybe not still difficult to
know also in the large magic lenic Cloud
there is another star HV
11417 put forward by the same group and
also disputed by Anna ogrady she thinks
it's a much closer Halo star um again it
shows some of the characteristics of
being a
tzo but um she thought it was much much
closer to us and therefore not as bright
perhaps just in the line of sight rather
than actually being in the large magul
linic Cloud now the guia satellite has
just released its third catalog of data
and this reveals that the distance is
103,000 Light Years so that suggests
that it is actually a long way away um
and uh it also means that it's perhaps a
ezo so the jury is still out on this one
these are perhaps two of the best
candidates there are three others these
names here v595
copia uh iio Peri and KN cassop that are
possible TZ reported in
2002 um we're not entirely sure more
work needs to be done to try and pin
these down it would be fascinating if we
could confirm this Theory and prediction
of thorn and zit
Cal but moving on to another type of
star that we've been observing for a
while are Corona Borealis Stars our
Corona Borealis is the namesake star of
a group of variable stars um they are
unusual in that they are yellow but
they're quite Low Mass Yellow Giant
Stars so they're highly evolved Stars
they've gone off the main sequence and
they've formed um red giant stars and
then begun burning the helium to carbon
and have produced quite a lot of carbon
and it seems that they produce the
carbon as carbon dust in their
atmospheres and this builds up and up
and up causing the light to be blocked
and the star to dim now of course when
that happens it traps the Heat and the
uh star can't get dump its heat to space
so efficiently so it begins to build up
the heat inside that triggers off more
nuclear fusion and a burst of energy
which blows the carbon dust away and
then it settles back down again and so
you get this variable
Behavior it's entirely possible that
these things are also T zos and that
they contain a neutron
star in the center and it's possible
that this is results from the merger of
a neutron star and a white dwarf so you
might have had a binary system with a
massive star that died and formed a
neutron star after a supernova and a
more sunlike star that had also died and
formed a white dwarf and they might
spiral together merge and flare up the
neutron stars energy uh energization of
the white dwarf causing it to reburst
into activity and again look like an
Arona Borealis yellow Giant and there's
a couple of examples where we suspect
that is going on U aquarii and VZ
sagittari so have we discovered that
these predictions of 1977 and the thorn
zit cow objects exist no there are five
known candidate stars but um watch this
space we may learn more about this as uh
technology improves so thank you for
listening and I'll be back with some
more hybrid stars in part two